---
title: 'Of snails and Jain monks'
date: '2012-08-24T22:54:59+05:30'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=1929'
author: vishy
description: ''
type: post
id: 1929
categories: 
    - Running
tags: []
post_format: []
image:
    - ''
seo_follow:
    - 'false'
seo_noindex:
    - 'false'
---
*Jul 22, 2012*

Something happened on my Sunday morning run at 6:45am which reminded me of Jain monks. A thought needed to be shared so I initiated this post in the Drafts folder. Yesterday I re-read Kahlil Gibran’s Crime and Punishment (from his 1923 masterpiece [The Prophet](http://www.amazon.com/The-Prophet-Kahlil-Gibran/dp/0394404289)) and I knew that the post was ready to be written. The entire essay is beautiful but I quote five relevant lines:

> So the wrong-doer cannot do wrong without the hidden will of you all.
> 
> Like a procession you walk together towards your god-self.
> 
> You are the way and the wayfarers.
> 
> And when one of you falls down he falls for those behind him, a caution against the stumbling stone.
> 
> Ay, and he falls for those ahead of him, who though faster and surer of foot, yet removed not the stumbling stone.

<div style="text-align: left;">Started running at 6am.</div>1st round – saw a very large snail and a medium size snail crossing the trail. Thought to myself – hope they make it across without mishap.

2nd round – alas! crushed to death

Jains are vegetarians. They avoid eating root vegetables in general, as cutting root from a plant kills it unlike other parts of the plant (leaf, fruit, seed, etc.). Furthermore, according to Jain texts, root vegetables contain infinite microorganisms called [nigodas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigoda "Nigoda"). Followers of Jain dharma eat before the night falls. They filter water regularly so as to remove any small insects that may be present and boil water prior to consumption.

Jain monks and nuns walk barefoot and sweep the ground in front of them to avoid killing [insects](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insects "Insects") or other tiny beings. Even though all life is considered sacred by the Jains, human life is deemed the highest form of life.

Wikipedia article on Jainism: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jainism

5 major vows