---
title: "No such thing as “too much focus”"
date: '2017-07-06T23:46:38+00:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=2347'
author: vishy
description: ''
type: post
id: 2347
categories:
    - Uncategorized
tags: []
post_format: []
---
You’d think that alumni of the Peanut Butter Manifesto company would have learned their focus lesson.

Focus means different things to different companies at different level of maturities. For a large conglomerate/multi-business-unit company, the cost of not focusing enough might be a steady erosion of market share or.. missing out on the next big thing. But for an early stage startup, not focusing enough has existential implications.

So why do even non-rookie founders make the focus mistake so often at pivotal moments?

I believe it’s partly to do with psychology-meets-confusion but mostly due to the absence of a focus Nazi.

I passed the focus test in my first startup but failed in my second. How could that be? Did the passage of a mere seven years blunt my hard earned lesson?

**Graspr 2007 Q1**

By this time it was evident that our goal to become the destination of how-to videos would not be realized. We had pivoted to a video syndication platform targeting vertical DIY communities. Our ad supported revenue model would now involve a 3-way split (creator, publisher and platform/us). It seemed like the right pivot, our Series A investor backed this new direction and heck.. it’s not like we had too many other options.

At this ephemeral moment of clarity, entered the *video editing tool decision*. The tool, a severely delayed outsourced project, was ready.

Only problem was that it was too little too late.

There were startups that had focused entirely on the video editing space (Jumpcut which had been acquired by Yahoo, Asterpix, and Omnisio – a video annotation innovator who would eventually get snapped up by YouTube) and here we had this outsourced half-baked editing tool we were arguing about.

Me: “No way are we launching this video editor on our destination website when we are about to put all hands on deck for our new syndication play!”

She (my partner): “But the tool is ready!?”

Me: “Startups build stuff all the time which they end up not launching.. *even* after it’s ready.”

She: “But we invested so much in the tool.. why can’t we launch it and see if there’ll be any traction?”

Me: “But we’ve moved on to the syndication play. We can’t waste any more time on the website. And video creators have far FAR better editing tools already.”

She: “But the tool will be a good addition to our IP… and could increase our valuation.”

At this point I realized we had diverged too much. There were at least two other major points of disagreement between us and this was the proverbial last straw.

I was convinced that dicking around with a half-baked tool on a failed track and NOT going full steam ahead with our pivot was a recipe for failure.

I quit.

But I had passed the focus test.

**mGaadi**

I’m not much of a cards player but I’m still going to try this analogy.

After a frenetic quarter (2015Q1) of Series A fundraising, precipitated by the barbarians at the gate (Ola and Uber), the writing on the wall was bold and uppercase. It was pivot time.

The frontier markets beckoned. Early inquiries from interested partners in Nigeria, Kenya, and Sri Lanka provided a glimpse at redemption.

The new opportunity was to sign SaaS licensing deals with partners in frontier markets. It didn’t appear that Uber, Ola or Grab would enter Africa or any of our target South East Asian countries in a hurry (i.e. we probably had a headstart of 2 years and we were still focused on the tuk-tuk, not taxi market).

Our seed investor (Unitus Seed Fund) liked this new direction. They agreed to anchor the next (Seed+) round provided we could raise a matching amount from other investors.

We succeeded in raising that round.

A week prior to closing terms, a heated argument between us (my partner and me on one side) and Will Poole (USF partner).

WP: “So you are starting on this new frontier market push but you still want to work on the Smart Auto AND Prefixed Auto Stands partnership with Bangalore Police?”

We: “Well, yes. The Smart Auto along with

3 tracks vs 1  
So yes. The passage of a mere seven years had indeed blunted my hard earned focus lesson.