---
title: 'A first date in Chicago'
date: '2013-06-22T08:08:17+05:30'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=2709'
author: vishy
description: ''
type: post
id: 2709
categories: 
    - Uncategorized
tags: []
post_format: []
image:
    - ''
seo_follow:
    - 'false'
seo_noindex:
    - 'false'
---
July 1996. It was salad days of the wireless generation. He didn’t have a cell phone. She didn’t either. The rendezvous was Borders – in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago. The perpetually bustling and bright book store had two entrances – one from Broadway Ave the other from Clark St.

He had reached Borders well before the planned tryst. His normal routine involved systematically scanning the Clearance section — part of his constant quest to build a home library without breaking the bank. On this day however, the constant peering at the two entrances hampered progress. It was a peculiar emotion that he was feeling. An exhilarating cocktail of excitement and anticipation with just a dash of nervousness.

\*\*\*\*

He thought back to that day six weeks ago. It seemed like yesterday.

The first thing he noticed was her eyes. Beautiful sparkling eyes with an oceanic depth. He barely caught himself from miniaturizing himself and setting sail. Then he noticed her nose. A nose to make Cleopatra snort with jealousy. Big earrings, a ponytail jauntily held together by a longish scarf and a black-and-white polka-dot knee length dress that was the perfect tribute to her figure. If Audrey Hepburn took a break from her royal duties for a private event, she might have dressed like this. And might have even come close to this woman’s looks.

And she had talked to him.