---
title: 'Running around in ovals'
date: '2018-08-18T18:57:29+05:30'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=3513'
author: vishy
description: ''
type: post
id: 3513
categories: 
    - Uncategorized
tags: []
post_format: []
---
It’s been two years since I ran the longest race of my life. I’ve made attempts to finish this post. None succeeded because I couldn’t definitively answer two questions “Why did I pick this race?” And “Would I do this again?”

Asthmatic boy in Bokaro.. receiving a summons, s Rajput in Bangalore, studious boy in Bareilly,

Started seeing ovals.. (like close encounters of the 3rd kind)

I’ll continue my fine tradition of writing race reports at least a year after the event.

2016 wasn’t the first year Nagaraj Adiga organized the 24 hour stadium run. It was the ‘second’ year and he raised the ante by adding a 36-hour category.

I can’t say a 24 hour race was in my bucket list.. even in a previous life when I believed in bucket lists.

Like many crazy things that one voluntarily undertakes, several contributing factors were at play.

- I had after all run a largely self-supported 12 hour run. I merely needed to *double* it.
- The genesis of that prerequisite run was a protracted and lean pulmonary patch. Taking daily puffs from a strong inhaler just to sustain the weekly running mileage can be a real dampener. Slowing down and going long.. wow! Match made in heaven.
- An ultra in the heart of town, a mere 10k from home, could it get more convenient?

A fringe benefit of being part of BHUKMP is that there’s no dearth of pioneers (aka ‘lunatics’). There’s Navin, who puts in all-nighter runs on a whim and has raced the Nilgiris, Uttarakashi and Bhati Ultras (he’s eyeing the UTMB). There’s Randeep, who had a frustrating debut DNF at Bhati Lakes and decided that winning it the next year was the best way to bury the ghosts. There’s Sunil, Bangalore’s ultra patriarch who showed later hordes of Indian runners that Comrades can be attempted and conquered. And there’s Jugy, the original trail discoverer par excellence and the group’s Barnabas Sackett, running ultras when most of us were wet behind our running ears.

Churning the lake