---
title: 'Geocoded musical memories'
date: '2020-08-05T12:52:58+05:30'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=4242'
author: vishy
description: ''
type: post
id: 4242
categories: 
    - Music
tags: []
post_format: []
---
**\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*  
Part 2**

**\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\***

My generation is possibly the last that got most of its music recommendations via friends &amp; family, radio stations, and eclectic cafes. This section is a tribute of sorts to folks who introduced the most delightful music to me.. at key points in my life.

Here I go in chronological order..

- My big brother Srinivas: moving from small town Bokaro to big city Madras hostel life in early 80’s meant serious exposure to rock and heavy metal. Lucky me because his next few summer vacations became my immersion into AC/DC, Uriah Heep, Judas Priest, and related luminaries. I’m sure skipping rock and drinking straight from the metal had a positive influence on my life.
- My cousin Swarna: On a visit to Bokaro, she famously remarked “The silence is deafening!” A summer later, in her South Calcutta high-rise apartment, we would understand what she meant. But it was really the summer of 1986 when I (and my sister) were introduced to “pop music”. Wham, Phil Collins, Madonna, and some other female stars. We returned to Bokaro with tapes of No Jacket Required and Wham. Yeah! I know what you are thinking – *Pop after metal*? I’m shaking my head too.
- Jayant (aka Boris) Ramakrishnan: I had to collapse Roger Waters, Rush, cd player,
- Manish Jindal: high quality recording of Dire Straits
- Vochak: Jethro Tull, Black Sabbath, and heavy metal
- Shivakumar Raman/classic rock station 107.5?
- Chicago: Larry Dunn, Poonam, Mike Firman
- Florida: Borders Book Store Clearwater (Cesaria Evora)
- Yoshis at Jack London square
- Coffee Society (Cupertino)

——-

- AC DC on the Vizag beach on brand new Sony Walkman (1984’ish)
- Rush &amp; Pros &amp; Cons of hitch hiking (and esp. that song) – Boris’s CD player
- Billy Joel’s We didn’t start the fire in Puneet Mohan’s hostel room
- Boy in the bubble I-10 W, returning to Houston to return Hertz rental within 1 hour grace period
- The Logical Song (on Srini’s balcony in Cambridge Oaks)
- Jethro Tull’s Teacher on Vochak’s tape recorder (beat-up cassette)
- Tull’s Thick as a Brick (somewhere between Texas &amp; Minneapolis in a Toyota Camry) — “Phil Collins is a better drummer than this”
- Uttam Singh’s “song he played” during power cuts in Jamshedpur
- Cesario Evora in Borders, Clearwater (I had to buy it of course)
- Coffee Society (Ratatat &amp; Jaga Jazzist)
- 